---
layout: post
title:  "How to finish a scene that you don't want to write"
date:   2016-02-28
tags: writing
excerpt: "Hint: conflict"
---


I’ve re-read some of my old stories recently. I enjoy all of them, of course –
I’m slightly biased that way.  I also mostly wrote the kinds of stories that I
wanted to read. The grand majority of stories were for nobody’s eyes but my own,
and I in fact would be mortified if some of them got into the wrong hands. The
wrong hands being anyone’s other than mine. And even I cringe when I read them.

But, I digress. The stories that really keep me riveted are those where the
characters are constantly in conflict with each other. I love the tension. I
don’t want to know who is going to win ahead of time. I want the characters to
struggle against each other even when they’re on the same team.

I re-discovered a story recently that I wrote, and it was really good! There
were people fighting with one another over a third person, there was yelling,
there was the threat of physical violence. It was so good that I missed my
subway stop twice: once in the forward direction, and then I missed it going
back as well.

It doesn’t just move the plot forward, but it makes it compelling to both read
AND write. [Write a Novel in 30
Days](https://www.amazon.com/Write-Novel-Days-Sara-McGrath/dp/0615182364), by the
creator of NaNoWriMo, encourages
killing a character off when your story seems to stagnate. In the same way,
throwing in someone angry, sneaky or just contrary can power up the scene again
and give you the steam to push through. If I find myself wandering off in the
middle of scene, wanting to write something more compelling, I have to take a
step backwards and think what it is I can do to make this scene compelling. Why
do none of the characters have conflicting motivations? Maybe I need to speed
through the scene and get to something more interesting to read as well as
write.

(I’m imagining characters flinging up their arms mid-scene and exclaiming, “I
just don’t understand my *motivation* in this scene!”)

At the same time, you can’t manufacture conflict without a legitimate cause.
Characters still need to act in a reasonable(ish) and believable way. For me,
the best stories are about internal conflict, which is difficult to manufacture
in a believable way. So to write a good scene, I have to keep all the character
personalities, the overall plot, the pacing and the conflict in mind. No wonder
plotting intimidates me. Fortunately, well-developed characters seem to do a lot
of this work for me (more about this trippy and awesome effect in the future!).

It does beg the questions though – how do you write love scenes that move
forward at pace? Or when two people are in tune for a common goal? Does there
really need to be conflict in every scene? Maybe at some point, the momentum of
the story is enough to keep the pace of the story without needing that conflict.
Maybe I need to flip through some novels to see what other authors do to keep
that kind of thing on track.
